# DjanJinja v0.5

DjanJinja: the sound you make when you've got peanut butter stuck to the roof of
your mouth. Incidentally, it also happens to be the name of a new re-usable
Django app. This one, in fact.

DjanJinja exists to help you leverage the power of
[Jinja2](http://jinja.pocoo.org/2/) templates in your Django projects. It's
simple to get started.

## Installing and Using DjanJinja

### Installing DjanJinja

1. Install DjanJinja using `easy_install djanjinja`, `pip install djanjinja`, or
   by grabbing a copy of the Mercurial repo and running `python setup.py
   install`.
2. Add `'djanjinja'` to your `INSTALLED_APPS` list.
3. (Optionally) add `'djanjinja.middleware.RequestContextMiddleware'` to your
   `MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES` list.

It’s assumed that you have fairly recent versions of Jinja2 and Django
installed. The author recommends the *most recent* stable versions of each,
which should be installable via PyPI (i.e. a simple `easy_install` or `pip
install`). A lot of people have their own ways of installing things, so the
author hasn’t put any explicit requirements in the `setup.py` file. DjanJinja
just expects to find `jinja2` and `django` on the import path.

### Using DjanJinja

* Instead of using `django.shortcuts.render_to_response`, use one of the
  Jinja2-based functions provided.
* Instead of using the Django loaders to load templates, get them from the
  Jinja2 environment created for you by DjanJinja.
* Instead of using Django’s provided generic views, use those contained within
  `djanjinja.generic` (at the moment the only one is `direct_to_template()`).

## Bundles

A Jinja2 environment can contain additional filters, tests and global variables
which will be available in all templates rendered through that environment.
Since individual Django apps will have their own set of things to add to the
environment, DjanJinja adds the concept of ‘bundles’; small objects containing
some global variables, filters and tests. Each app may define any number of
these bundles which can then be loaded as required.

### Defining Bundles

It’s relatively easy to define a bundle; an example is shown below:
    
    from djanjinja.loader import Bundle
    
    foo = Bundle()
    foo.globals['myvar'] = 12345
    
    @foo.envfilter
    def myenvfilter(environment, value):
        pass # do something here...
    
    @foo.ctxfunction
    def mycontextfunction(context, value):
        pass # do something here...

Here we define a bundle called `foo`, with a global variable of `myvar`
containing the value `12345`, an environment filter and a context function (for
more information on each of these please consult the Jinja2 documentation). The
`Bundle` class also supplies these handy decorators (the full list can be found
as `djanjinja.loader.Bundle.TYPES`) to define various components.

DjanJinja expects to find bundles in a `bundles` submodule of your Django app.
You can lay things out in one of two ways:
    
* Add a file called `bundles.py` to your app, and within this define multiple
  `Bundle` instances.
* Add a package called `bundles` to your app (i.e. a `bundles` directory
  containing an empty file called `__init__.py`), and within this define
  submodules for each of your bundles. Each submodule should have a top-level
  `bundle` variable which is an instance of the `Bundle` class.

You can actually mix and match these; you could add some bundle instances to the
`bundles/__init__.py` file with different names, in addition to having the
submodules. These are loaded lazily, so DjanJinja sees no real difference. It
doesn’t scour the `bundles` module for definitions, it just loads what you ask
it to.

### Addressing Bundles

In order to use the functions, filters and tests defined in a bundle, you first
have to load it into the environment. Bundles are specified in two parts: the
‘app label’ and the ‘bundle name’. The app label is simply the name of the app
which contains it. For example, it may be `django.contrib.auth`, or simply
`auth`, since you may just give the last part of the full name and DjanJinja
will figure it out from looking at the `INSTALLED_APPS` setting.

If a bundle is defined within a `bundles.py` or a `bundles/__init__.py` file,
then the bundle name will be the name in the module with which it was defined.
For example:
    
    # in the file `myapp/bundles.py`
    foo = Bundle()
    foo.globals['myvar'] = 12345

In this case, the app label will be `myapp`, and the bundle name will be `foo`.
If the bundles are defined in submodules, then the bundle name will be the name
of the submodule.

### Loading Bundles

In order to load any bundles into the Jinja2 environment, you need to specify a
`DJANJINJA_BUNDLES` setting in your `settings.py` file. This is a list or tuple
of bundle specifiers in an `'app_label.bundle_name'` format. For example:

    DJANJINJA_BUNDLES = (
        'djanjinja.cache',
        'djanjinja.humanize',
        'djanjinja.site',
    )

You can also add bundles to the environment programmatically. This is useful
when:

* Your app needs to do some initial setup before a bundle is loaded.
* Your app relies on a particular bundle being present in the environment
  anyway, and you don’t want the user to have to add the bundle to
  `DJANJINJA_BUNDLES` manually.
* Your app needs to load bundles dynamically.

You can load a bundle into an environment like this:

    import djanjinja
    env = djanjinja.get_env()
    env.load('app_label', 'bundle_name', reload=False)

This will load the bundle into the environment, passing through if it’s already
loaded. If you specify `reload=True`, you can make it reload a bundle even if
it’s been loaded.

You should put this code somewhere where it will get executed when you want it
to. If you want it to be executed immediately, as Django starts up, put it in
`myapp/__init__.py`.

### Caveats and Limitations

Jinja2 does not yet support scoped filters and tests; as a result of this, the
contents of bundles will be loaded into the global environment. It is important
to make sure that definitions in your bundle do not override those in another
bundle. This is especially important with threaded web applications, as multiple
bundles overriding one another could cause unpredictable behavior in the
templates.

### Included Bundles

DjanJinja provides three bundles already which either replace Django
counterparts or add some useful functionality to your Jinja2 templates:
    
* `djanjinja.cache`: Loading this bundle will add a global `cache` object to the
  environment; this is the Django cache, and allows you to carry out caching
  operations from within your templates (such as `cache.get(key)`, et cetera).

* `djanjinja.humanize`: This will add all of the filters contained within the
  `django.contrib.humanize` app; consult the official Django docs for more
  information on the filters provided.

* `djanjinja.site`: This will add two functions to the global environment:
  `url`, and `setting`. The former acts like Django’s template tag, by reversing
  URLconf names and views into URLs, but because Jinja2 supports a richer
  syntax, it can be used via `{{ url(name, *args, **kwargs) }}` instead.
  `setting` attempts to resolve a setting name into a value, returning an
  optional default instead (i.e. `setting('MEDIA_URL', '/media')`).

## Extensions

Jinja2 supports the concept of *environment extensions*; these are non-trivial
plugins which enhance the Jinja2 templating engine itself. By default, the
environment is configured with the `do` statement and the loop controls (i.e.
`break` and `continue`), but if you want to add extensions to the environment
then you can do so with the `JINJA_EXTENSIONS` setting. Just add this to your
`settings.py` file:
    
    JINJA_EXTENSIONS = (
        'jinja2.ext.i18n', # i18n Extension
        ...
    )

For all the extensions you wish to load. This will be passed in directly to the
`jinja2.Environment` constructor.

If you have set `USE_I18N = True` in your settings file, then DjanJinja will
automatically initialize the i18n machinery for the Jinja2 environment, loading
your Django translations during the bootstrapping process. For more information
on how to use the Jinja2 i18n extension, please consult the Jinja2
documentation.

### Cache

DjanJinja also provides an extension for fragment caching using the Django cache
system. The code for this borrows heavily from the example in the Jinja2
documentation, but with a few extras thrown in. You can use the extension like
this:
    
    {% cache (parameter1, param2, param3), timeout %}
        ...
    {% endcache %}

The tuple of parameters is used to generate the cache key for this fragment. You
can place any object here, so long as it is suitable for serialization by the
standard library `marshal` module. The cache key for the fragment is generated
by marshaling the parameters, hashing them and then using the digest with a
prefix as the key. This allows you to specify cached fragments which vary
depending on multiple variables. The timeout is optional, and should be given in
seconds.

## Shortcut Functions

DjanJinja provides you with two shortcut functions for rendering templates,
`render_to_response` and `render_to_string`. These are very similar to those
provided by Django in the `django.shortcuts` module, except they use Jinja2
instead of the Django templating system. To use them from your views, just do
`from djanjinja.views import render_to_response, render_to_string` at the top of
your views module.

## `RequestContext`

One of Django's most useful features is the `RequestContext` class, which allows
you to specify several context processors which each add some information to the
context before templates are rendered. Luckily, this feature is
template-agnostic, and is therefore fully compatible with DjanJinja.

However, DjanJinja also provides you with some very helpful shortcuts for using
request contexts. Usually, without DjanJinja, you would use them like this:
    
    from django.shortcuts import render_to_response
    from django.template import RequestContext
    
    def myview(request):
        context = {'foo': bar, 'spam': eggs}
        return render_to_response('template_name.html',
            context, context_instance=RequestContext())

To be honest,this doesn't look very much like a 'shortcut' at all. For this
reason, DjanJinja contains a subclass of `RequestContext` specialised for
Jinja2, which is used like this:

    from djanjinja.views import RequestContext
    
    def myview(request):
        context = RequestContext(request, {'foo': bar, 'spam': eggs})
        return context.render_response('template_name.html')

This code is much more concise, but loses none of the flexibility of the
previous example. The main changes made are the addition of `render_response`
and `render_string` methods to the context object itself. This is highly
specialised to rendering Jinja2 templates, so it may not be a very reusable
approach (indeed, other code which does not use Jinja2 will need to use the full
Django syntax), but it works for the problem domain it was designed for.

## Middleware

One important thing to note from before is that each time a `RequestContext`
instance is constructed, it is necessary to explicitly pass the request. In
object-oriented programming, and Python expecially, when we have functions to
which we must always pass an object of a certain type, it makes sense to make
that function a *method* of the type. When that function is not, in fact, a
function, but a constructor, this seems more difficult. However, thanks to a
feature of Python known as metaprogramming, we can do this very easily. Because
it's not exactly obvious how to do so, DjanJinja includes a special piece of
middleware which can help make your code a lot shorter yet *still* retain all
the functionality and flexibility of the previous two examples.

To use this middleware, simply add
`'djanjinja.middleware.RequestContextMiddleware'` to your `MIDDLEWARE_CLASSES`
list in the settings module of your project. Then, you can write view code like
this:

    def myview(request):
        return request.Context({'foo': bar, 'spam': eggs}).render_response(
            'template_name.html')

As you can see, we've greatly reduced the verbosity of the previous code, but
it's still obvious what this code does. The middleware attaches a `Context`
attribute to each request object. This attribute is in fact a fully-fledged
Python class, which may itself be subclassed and modified later on. When
constructed, it behaves almost exactly the same as the usual `RequestContext`,
only it uses the request object to which it has been attached, so you don't have
to pass it in to the constructor every time.

## Template Loading

DjanJinja hooks directly into the Django template loader machinery to load
templates. This means you can mix Jinja2 templates freely with Django templates,
in your `TEMPLATE_DIRS` and your applications, and render each type
independently and seamlessly. If you want more information on how it actually
works, please consult the `djanjinja/environment.py` file.

## License

This software is licensed under the following MIT-style license:
    
    Copyright (c) 2009 Zachary Voase

    Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
    obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
    files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
    restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
    copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
    copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
    Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
    conditions:

    The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
    included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

    THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
    EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
    OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
    NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
    HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
    WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
    FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
    OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

## Author

Zachary Voase can be found on [Twitter](http://twitter.com/zacharyvoase).
